<div style="text-align:right; color:#aaa">Kristoffer Dyrkorn, November 4, 2022</div>

# 10. Epilogue

(This article is the last part of a [series](./#sections). You can jump to the [previous section](9) if you would like to.)

I hope the tutorial was useful! The material presented here is the result of searching, reading and testing out concepts in code. My main sources have been:

- [This article series by Fabian Giesen (ryg)](https://fgiesen.wordpress.com/2013/02/06/the-barycentric-conspirac/)
- [Scratchapixel's article on rasterization](https://www.scratchapixel.com/lessons/3d-basic-rendering/rasterization-practical-implementation)

I have tried to add detail on the topics that are rarely explained, such as the determinant adjustments, the need to use fixed-point numbers, and the relation between fixed-point numbers and subpixels. Hopefully this has given you a more complete picture of the process of high-quality triangle rasterization.

Did you miss anything? Were some of the topics hard to understand? Was something incorrect? Feel free to [give me feedback](https://github.com/kristoffer-dyrkorn/triangle-rasterizer/issues)!

## What next?

Although the concepts presented here might already seem complicated, this is still a rather simple software rasterizer. For example, we can only draw single-colored triangles. Should we use the rasterizer in visualizations of triangle-based 3D objects, we would need to support more advanced filling methods. Some examples:

- Interpolation of vertex colors (linear interpolation is fast, but not correct in 3D)
- Perspective correct interpolation of vertex colors or textures
- Interpolation of vertex normals and doing per-pixel lightning calculations

Also, although the incremental version of the rasterizer gave a nice performance boost, there are still quite a few optimizations that could be tried out. A software rasterizer is never fast enough!

Some examples of ideas to explore:

- Finding ways to sample fewer candidate pixels inside the bounding box
- Testing if a WASM-based implementation (of the inner loop) would run faster
- Using SIMD instructions to do more work per loop iteration
- Working on tiles (ie squares of, for example, 8x8 pixels) instead of single pixels
- Making the rasterizer work on tiles in parallel (just like GPUs do)

<br/>
Have fun!

<br/>

Kristoffer

<hr/>

### About the author

Kristoffer Dyrkorn is a Senior Principal Software Engineer at Autodesk. He makes software that renders geodata in landscape and architecture visualizations. He can be reached at kristoffer.dyrkorn AT autodesk.com.
